Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Vice President,
Interactive Media Group, Tim Schaaf.
[Transcript missing]
So, as we've mentioned earlier today,
there's a lot more happening
inside that box than just what's
going on in the microprocessor.
The chips that we ship
in our current systems,
the Radeon systems,
are already up at about
115 million transistors.
This is about double the
complexity of the microprocessor.
The system that
Steve introduced this morning,
the new NVIDIA GeForce
6800 Ultra processors,
have 222 million transistors.
Four times the complexity of the G5.
That's an incredible opportunity for
all of us to be able to enhance the
functionality of our applications.
But unfortunately,
it doesn't happen automatically.
And the question we're going
to try to address today is
how to unlock this stuff.
There are many, many obstacles.
So, in 1984, this was the statement that
Apple made about the importance
of rich graphics interface,
WYSIWYG, and interactive UI.
This was really a dramatic statement.
This brought into the mainstream
concepts which had not been seen
in a personal computer before.
Spin forward 20 years to this year,
Apple's introduced this
product called Motion.
And I think it's a very good
example of the way the expectations
have evolved over the 20 years.
Still rich graphics, still essentially a
WYSIWYG kind of an experience.
Very much an interactive UI.
But obviously,
the kind of software required to
build this interface is incredibly
more complicated than the software
required to build the app of 1984.
Let's look at the operating systems
that you have to learn and understand.
Apple has, you know, roughly speaking,
every single year,
we're introducing another thousand
man years worth of software.
Every single year.
And you can see this in this sort of
very simplistic view of the size of the
disks that we have to ship to you in
order to deliver the operating system.
We've moved to a DVD this year because,
yes, it's growing again.
How are you going to manage
all of those toolboxes?
It's just so much stuff to learn.
As we introduce more and more systems
with more and more diversity of hardware
with fancier and fancier architectures,
the question becomes,
how the heck do you get all
this performance out of the box?
It used to be that you could sit down
and you'd learn the instruction set.
You'd write some programs and
you'd learn what was fast and then
you'd write that in your code.
And you'd have the
fastest app on the planet.
It doesn't work like that anymore.
It's really, really complex.
And the performance decisions that you
would make for a G3 will be different,
very different than what
you're going to do on a G5.
How can you do that automatically?
This is not a puzzle you probably want to
spend all of your time trying to solve.
When we sat down to think about what
would be most profound in our contract,
in our contribution to Tiger,
in the graphics and
media team that I run,
we wanted to look at
these issues and say,
how can we unlock this power for you,
protect your software investment,
and give you tools to build beautiful UI?
And this was our goal.
So we want to build the technologies
that are going to allow you
to build the next killer app.
Because we believe,
as cool as these demos
that you've seen today are,
we believe that you folks are the
ones who are going to have the really,
really exciting ideas.
I mean, it's neat to see
Core Image processing these images.
And we're going to show
you some more of it today.
But we are absolutely positive that your
inventions are going to blow us away,
amaze and delight your customers,
and just baffle the world.
How do they do that?
So here's the architecture of the
graphics and media layer as a panther.
Basically,
very familiar block diagram here.
We've got Quartz 2D, we've got QuickTime,
we've got OpenGL, all layered on top of
the graphics hardware.
This has been a very,
very powerful architecture for Apple.
There's only one problem here.
You could look at this another way as
three stove-piped technology stacks.
And any of these are going to
be As many of you will know,
if you start to try to
combine these technologies,
drawing the lines from left to right,
right to left, more horizontally,
you start to run into
some real challenges.
So in Tiger,
one of the most important changes
we are making is we're kind of
turning this diagram on its side
in order to give a much better,
much more powerfully layered
system for you to work with.
Now,
the APIs aren't all different in Tiger.
Your applications are still
going to be compatible.
But we're working down in the lower
layers to reorient this architecture in
order to maximize the kind of performance
and the kind of data interoperability
that we'll be able to provide through
the APIs so that your apps will be able
to combine all these technologies and
still have a high performance result.
I've broken this up a
little bit more detail.
You see the Quartz stack,
you see the Core Audio stack.
They've both got their hardware
abstraction layer conceptually.
And so what I want to do for the rest
of this talk is we're going to dive
in and look at what's going on in each
of the individual technology areas
and tell you some of the highlights
of what's new and hopefully plant
some seeds for how you might be able
to take advantage of these things.
Our first area is Core Audio.
As we've expressed earlier today,
this is a very profound technology
for processing of audio.
This is the most advanced
audio subsystem built into any
operating system anywhere else.
When you look at other operating systems,
if you want to achieve the kind
of performance that we're able
to achieve inside of Mac OS X,
you always end up having to
build special things into the OS.
You have to add special extensions
in order to achieve performance.
So you have to build special
extensions in order to achieve
the kind of performance that you
get with Mac OS X out of the box.
What does that look like?
Well, it's the ultra-low latency that
allows you to do demos like the guitar
demo you saw earlier this morning.
It's playing live into the system.
It's processing the audio in real time,
sending it back out the audio outputs.
And it feels like he's playing
it live as if it were a piece of
hardware in a music studio rack.
We've got HiDef.
This was the first media processing
stack to build in a full floating
point processing pipeline.
And it's worked tremendously well for us.
Not only does it allow us to
support current state-of-the-art
processing 24-bit type samples,
we can go way beyond that
as the industry evolves.
We support a very,
very wide range of sample rates and
there's no constraints on the channels.
We have beautiful,
robust plug-and-play compatibility across
a wide range of connectivity protocols.
We've got built-in native,
built-in MIDI support,
very low latency just
like the audio support.
And then we have this very important
architecture for extending the system.
One of the most important parts of an
audio subsystem is the set of customized
audio plug-ins that you can bring to bear
to provide your audio a unique kind of
a sound or a unique kind of processing.
Now,
we've had a tremendous amount of success
with our audio units and this is a
small sampling of the developers who
have gotten on board with audio units.
Now, of course,
the universe of developers who
are using core audio is much,
much larger.
But here's a really important
collection of developers who are
focused on audio unit development.
This success has brought some
very interesting new challenges
and some new opportunities.
As the community of developers
who are centered around core
audio continues to grow,
one of the things that we've been very
concerned to be able to provide is a
very high level of compatibility between
all these different kinds of plug-ins.
And so earlier this year,
we introduced a program and a piece
of software that would help audio unit
developers ensure that their audio
unit plug-ins were going to be robust,
compatible as they went from one
app to the next and to the next.
We're introducing today a
new product called AU Lab,
which is a part of the
developer program called AU Lab.
AU Lab is a part of the
developer program called AU Lab,
which is a part of the
the developer tool set that's going
to take this one step further and
I'd like to give you a chance to
take a look at that in just a second.
And what this is going to allow you
to do is it's going to help--help
the audio unit developer develop
an even more robust audio unit
that can be plugged into the ever
increasingly complex and sophisticated
range of audio applications.
So why don't we come over and
take a quick look at this.
So we have this little
application called AU Lab.
And basically,
the model of AU Lab is it's a mixer.
And the first thing we're going to
do is we're going to come in here
and we're going to add a generator.
And we've built into this tool
a generator that's capable of
bringing in audio from a file.
Now, of course,
it can also process audio in real time,
coming in through the different
kinds of inputs that you can support.
So the first thing we're going to
do is we're going to open up the
little configuration panel for this,
bring in an audio file.
And we can play it.
It's just like an audio playback system.
Great.
Now, what you can do is you can bring
in your audio unit plug-in and
load it into this little mixer,
and it's now been inserted
into the processing chain.
And what we've got here is we've
got a new audio unit that we're
providing in Tiger called TimePitch.
And what it has the ability to do,
it's a very sophisticated
DSP algorithm that allows you to
alter the timing of a piece of
audio without altering the pitch,
or you can alter the pitch
without altering the timing.
And I'll give you a very quick example
of what this might be useful for.
So this is a piece of music
by a couple of guitar players,
John McLaughlin, Al DiMila,
two of the fastest guitar players
I've ever seen in the universe.
And what you encounter with
this kind of guitar playing is
that they start playing really,
really fast.
My son is a guitar player
and he's always asking,
"How can I learn how to learn this music?
It's going too fast." This little plug-in
basically allows you to take these files
You can dramatically slow them
down without altering the pitch.
You can go faster.
And again,
it sounds just like the original audio.
So there's a very simple demo of
how AU Lab can be used to validate
and test out your audio units.
And we think it's going to be a very
important part of our overall strategy
for ensuring broad adoption of audio
units and being able to help facilitate
a very powerful community in the
audio world relying on Core Audio.
So here's another situation
that's coming up more and more
as these Core Audio applications
are being enhanced.
Typical kind of a studio setup,
you've got multiple audio devices.
Today in Core Audio,
we can handle these devices just fine,
but when it comes to
managing those devices,
all the burden of managing which
channels are going where and the
inter-device synchronization,
the burden is on the application.
We're going to be introducing a
new technology that allows you
to add and remove audio units.
We're going to be integrating these
devices into one logical unit,
and we think it's going to make the
process of developing applications
for sophisticated studio setups much,
much easier.
Last of all, I want to talk about OpenAL.
OpenAL is an industry-standard
API for managing spatialized audio.
It's used all over the place in games.
It's a technology
developed by Creative Labs,
and we have been working with them
and other developers to build a
highly optimized version of OpenAL.
It's capable of supporting
not only super high quality
spatialized audio processing,
but it's also got a variety of modes to
be able to do lower complexity modes so
you can get lots and lots of channels.
We're going to build this into Tiger,
and we think it's going to be a great
addition to the OpenGL technology for a
complete solution for game development.
So this is the story about what's
happening with Quartz Audio.
What I want to do next is
I want to ask Peter Grafagnino,
our Quartz extremist,
to come over and tell you
about everything that's
going on in the Quartz world.
And it's a very large world.
I guess I can go to the podium.
Oh, there we are.
Okay.
So I'm going to walk you through the
technologies in the graphics stack.
I'm going to basically walk you
up the stack from the hardware,
talk a little bit more about that,
OpenGL, and then talking about Quartz.
And then Tim's going to come
back and talk about QuickTime.
So on the hardware side,
you've seen this graph many times.
This is pixels processed per second.
And if you look at also memory fill rate,
the current generation of graphics
chips are about 35 gigabytes
per second of memory bandwidth,
which is pretty incredible.
And as you've heard a
couple of times already,
this is kind of an inflection
point in computer graphics.
We now have programmability
at the pixel level,
it's a floating point,
it's accurate enough for high-end
work and high dynamic range,
and enables a lot of applications beyond
just the traditional gaming stuff.
So we're seeing a convergence of graphics
and media processing together in the GPU.
And there's some new
programming paradigms.
You heard me and Bertrand's talk
about the Stream Computing Model that
we're using for Core Image.
And Tiger will advance the state
of the art here and bring a lot
of ways to bring the power of
the GPU into your applications.
So there's a bunch of things you can
do in Tiger as far as GPU programming.
There's low-level access via OpenGL.
There's accelerated 2D graphics
we have with Core graphics,
which we'll talk about in a second.
We have accelerated image
processing with Core Image.
We have Core Video,
which we were also talking about.
Basically,
we've got a bunch of ways to leverage
the power of the graphics processor.
And the trick for your apps
is to try to use the highest
level of abstraction you can,
which allows us to do
more of the heavy lifting.
There's nothing wrong with going
down to the OpenGL layer if you
need to do that or want to do that.
But we've got these
higher-level services as well,
which you can take advantage of
and let the platform do the rest.
So the Tiger Quartz layer is optimized
to take advantage of programmable GPUs.
Now, it's not necessarily
required to run Tiger,
obviously, on a programmable part,
but it's optimized in that way.
And by programmable GPU, what do I mean?
I mean on the ATI product line,
any part that's an
ATI Radeon 9600 or higher,
or on the NVIDIA side,
the GeForce FX or higher,
or the new card that we
just announced today.
By technology,
I mean ARB Fragment Program,
if you're an OpenGL programmer,
or on the Windows side,
you sometimes hear it called
DirectX 9 capable hardware.
That's the basic class of hardware.
Now, interestingly enough,
if you look at the GPU versus the CPU,
the GPU is not necessarily always faster.
So it's something to keep in mind
that you really need to treat it as a
kind of a co-processing environment.
The high-end CPU,
if you put dual gigahertz,
2.5 gigahertz G5s in a computer with a
low-end but programmable graphics part,
the CPUs will be able to
easily beat the low-end GPUs.
So you always have to be aware of
the trade-off and really view the
GPU as kind of a co-processor and also
understand if you're flexible about
using GPU or CPU that your app will
scale to a much greater level with
the GPU scaling factors that we're
seeing that are exceeding Moore's Law.
So that's all I'm going
to say about hardware.
Just to motivate you guys to learn
more about what's going on there,
talk a little bit about OpenGL.
OpenGL is the foundation and
sort of the hardware abstraction
layer for our graphics hardware,
as Tim mentioned.
And there's a bunch of
things going on in Tiger.
There's the OpenGL shading language,
which we'll be supporting.
There's floating-point pixel support.
Some of this made its way into Panther.
There's major enhancements
to the OpenGL profiler tool,
which is a really popular developer tool
for analyzing your OpenGL performance.
New resource management improvements.
We're probably on our third or
fourth generation of kind of treating
the GPU as a full-fledged resource
to be managed within the kernel.
There's a lot of new stuff to support
many of the things you've seen today
and will see throughout the conference.
And I did want to mention one session
that was not in the show guide here,
which is the introduction
to OpenGL shading language,
which is going to be on Friday.
So be sure to check that out.
That's OpenGL.
Let's move up to the Quartz layer.
This year, we're dividing the Quartz
layer into three things.
There's Core Graphics, of course,
which is our 2D graphics
and windowing system.
Then there's Core Image and Core Video,
which are new this year.
Core Image is our image
processing engine,
and Core Video is our
video processing engine.
On the Core Graphics side,
we're not staying still here either.
So let me talk about that.
The big news in core graphics land
is that Quartz 2D goes extreme.
So we talked a little bit last year
about having Quartz 2D on OpenGL,
and this year it's going
to be the default in Tiger.
So we have quality with the 2D
rendering through OpenGL that's
virtually identical to software quality.
And any of you guys who know
about how GPUs make different
trade-offs about 2D graphics,
it's actually pretty tricky
to do this in all cases,
to get really high-quality text
with OpenGL is kind of a pain.
But we've taken care of all of that.
We cache even LCD-quality sub-pixel
position glyphs and can render
them and blit them onto the screen
with all the proper blending
you need to do to do that.
So this acceleration of Quartz 2D,
however,
does require programmable hardware
to be able to do the LCD blitting
and all the programmable blend modes.
The low-level benchmarks when
you put Quartz 2D on top of
GL increase by 2 to 100 times.
So there's some real impressive
performance gains to be had.
But the key to getting those
are to reuse your resources.
So if you have CG image
refs or CG pattern refs,
things like that,
and you're going to draw
them more than once,
just be sure to hold onto that and it
will get cached up in video memory.
The other thing,
since we can't accelerate Quick Draw,
if you use Quick Draw within a window
and you're using Quartz 2D Extreme,
we fall everything back to software.
So the core primitive
benchmarks with Quartz 2D,
you can see the increases here,
pretty striking.
Obviously,
GPUs are great at filling memory,
so an 800 by 800 rectangle
is 236 times faster.
It could probably even go faster if
we could figure out how to feed it.
Line drawing, for example, eight times.
Text strings.
Our software text path is
actually pretty tuned at 1 and
1/2 million glyphs per second,
but we're getting almost 5 million
glyphs per second with the hardware,
which is really good.
So we didn't turn it on by
default in the WWDC build,
but for those of you who know
about the Quartz debug tool,
you can go in and turn it on.
It works pretty well.
It works a little bit
better on ATI hardware than
NVIDIA hardware right now.
But you can turn it on.
We know that there are
a few bugs in there,
but if you want to try out your
app and see if things get faster,
if not, go catch your pattern
refs and image refs,
and you'll probably see quite
a performance difference.
The other thing to look at in Quartz
Debug is you'll notice a show user
interface resolution menu item.
And what we're talking about this
year at WWDC is getting ready for
a resolution independence in the
user interface in the tool kit.
And I think this is-- thanks.
[Transcript missing]
Just to show you Quartz Debug,
if you don't know Quartz Debug,
you can find it in the developer tools.
It's under the performance tools.
You can see I've got Quartz
2D Extreme enabled here.
I'm going to go up to that tools menu and
bring up the user interface resolution.
And let's crank up things a
little bit and give us kind of a
virtual scaling factor of about,
let's do something big like 1.75.
And now any app I launch is
going to get a 1.75 scale factor.
So let's launch Safari.
You can see I get a huge menu bar and
I'm not connected to the Internet.
Well, that's too bad.
But you can see how the
app is drawn much larger.
The menus are high resolution rendered.
You can see the rest of the--
if I switch to another app,
for example, it'll make it clear.
Here's Quartz Debugs menus.
They're still small,
whereas Safari's menus are big.
And so you can see that there's
going to be some drawing bugs,
like over here by the Google Search menu,
which we're-- we're working through
with the apps and the frameworks.
But you should use this tool on the
developer CD and test out your app
with the resolution independence.
So back to slides, please.
The next thing we're doing in Quartz
2D is floating point pixel support.
So yes, thanks.
What comes after millions?
It's jillions, I don't know.
But it's full floating point
pixel processing pipeline.
Floating point both on the
source and destination,
so CG image refs can be floating point,
as well as CG bitmap context,
the destination for drawing.
We used unclamped colors processed
all throughout the pipeline.
And we're going to have a floating point
CMM based on ColorSync in the Tiger GM.
So that's pretty exciting.
And to go with that,
we have a new framework in
Quartz Graphics called ImageIO,
which is a thread-safe image
handling library for FileIO.
And it includes new HDR,
or high dynamic range,
floating point formats,
such as OpenEXR from ILM,
and various flavors of floating
point TIFF that are out there.
Next up is PDFKit.
PDFKit is a high-level
framework for dealing with PDFs.
It's an Objective-C framework
up at the AppKit layer.
You can think of it as
preview on a palette.
And much in the way that WebKit is
sort of Safari on a palette,
PDFKit is the PDF sort of half
of preview running on a palette,
complete with link traversal
and printing and fit to page
and all that sort of stuff.
[Transcript missing]
Quartz 2D in Tiger will fill in the
last of the big holes that we've
definitely gotten feedback on.
The headers are still available,
but they'll be marked deprecated if
you compile against the Tiger target.
Binary compatibility, of course,
will continue to exist, at least for now.
And you should definitely budget
time in your next revision of
your app to move to Core Graphics.
And we really want to
make it work for you,
so we're definitely open to feedback.
And we have a whole session
about transitioning to Quartz
2D that's specifically targeted
for QuickDraw developers.
And we've got a lot of new stuff
that should make it easier,
and we want to hear about
more things you might need.
So to help motivate that a little bit,
let me do a quick demo.
of line drawing performance.
So this is one thing we got
feedback on as being much faster in
QuickDraw than it was in Quartz 2D.
Quartz 2D would lovingly anti-alias
all of your intersecting polygons
and some N squared algorithm
and would just be really slow.
So people would use QuickDraw
for stuff like this.
Well, we've improved Quartz 2D such that
it's now 1.5 million and this is
actually the software renderer.
And once we go on top of GL,
we're actually up at 11
million lines per second.
Great.
And this is still only
immediate mode in OpenGL.
If you know anything about OpenGL,
there might be another 5,
10x on top of this as well.
But clearly, GL is the way to draw lines.
And so just to drive it home,
we're looking at, you know, 41.
We didn't draw the initial
Quartz 2D software,
which is somewhat less than 1.0,
as some of you might know.
But getting on to Quartz 2D is
clearly what you want to do here.
So back to slides, please.
So some bonus sessions
in the 2D graphics path.
The high dynamic range is going
to be talked about together
with the Image.io framework.
That session is going to be on Wednesday,
and then we have a session
on PDF kit tomorrow.
So please attend those.
Let's talk a little bit about Core Image.
You've heard about it in the
keynotes and other talks.
Again,
it's a framework for GPU-focused image
processing with a rich set of built-in
filters and our plugin architecture.
The great thing is that you don't have
to know about OpenGL to use Core Image,
which is a nice feature for those
of you coming from the 2D world.
Core Image actually
is an Objective-C API.
It's based on a stream-based
processing model.
The number of abstractions is very few.
There's images and there's kernels,
which are the processing units.
And then there's samplers,
which basically kernels use to
access data from within images.
Kernels are described in a
runtime compiled language,
high-level C-like language.
The parallelism is implicit.
As I said before in the other talk,
there's no explicit loops or threads.
You just use the image unit or program
the image unit to do what you want.
And the evaluation model,
since it's implicit, is mappable to GPUs,
symmetric multi-threaded CPUs,
or other parallel architectures.
You might imagine.
We have a software fallback that's
actually quite good as well.
It uses the Velocity Engine and
a just-in-time compiler
that's custom for Core Image.
And it generates auto-vectorized
code optimized either for G4
or G5 or even dual G5 with
multi-threading if that's available.
And the evaluation engine does a number
of sort of compiler techniques at the
graph level as you construct image
units together to minimize the number of
passes and handle the temporary buffers,
pbuffers and caching
and things like that.
So it does a lot of
heavy lifting for you,
and let me give you a demo of that.
So when we were preparing
for the keynote,
we did a lot of sort of experimentation
with core image and some imagery that
we didn't use in the keynote I thought
it would be fun to show you guys here.
So here's a couple of
interesting filters.
Here's a circular half-tone
screen on this image.
I can change the width.
It's all getting computed on GPU.
This is a Radeon 9800 XT card.
Some other ones that are kind of fun.
The surfer wave.
Reset back and let's
do a zoom blur on him.
Oops, not white point adjust.
So that's kind of cool.
You can change the amount.
What else did I have?
Let's do a layer effect.
So I'm going to bring a water
droplet background image.
Let's turn off Zoom Blur.
Let me add another filter.
which is a piece of water artwork.
Let me add a rounded 3D effect on that,
and you can see what that looks like.
That's pretty neat.
The other thing I wanted to
show was kind of a build of
One of the stacking effects,
Phil did the electric zebra this morning,
and I'm going to show
you a different one,
which is kind of also in the 60s theme.
So let's, we're going to try to go for
some kind of a silkscreen look,
so we're going to,
Color posterize the image a little bit.
Then I'm going to oversaturate it using a
Over saturate filter.
I'm going to use a false color.
A false color just converts
the image to gray scale and
then maps it through a ramp.
And I've got a couple of colors
here that I'm going to use.
So yeah,
so now it's looking pretty psychedelic.
Then the next thing I add in is every
60s poster needs a lenticular halo.
There we go.
Which, this is doing a,
it's a generator that generates kind
of a sun striation sort of a thing.
Let's do that.
Okay, let's bring in some line art.
Oops, well, that's okay.
The 60s album, which is the type,
and we'll insert a bump map in
there to do our bump distortion.
And then, lastly,
I think I have a crop in here.
Yeah, so you can crop out the edges.
So, but the great thing is
the whole stack is live.
I can, it's totally non-destructive.
It's just sort of remembering
the recipe to create the image,
and you can kind of turn off the layers
and see how each one is doing or go back.
I can change the posterization
level on the fly.
I can even go back and
change the image on the fly.
I could do it to, you know,
the water image if I, you know,
my band changed.
Or I can even run video
through the background.
So, you know,
you get your album cover and
your video at the same time.
And it's all still live.
I can find the bump.
Let me add the bump back in,
I lost where it was.
[Transcript missing]
So you definitely want to go
to the core image session.
Hopefully we've teased you
enough by showing it in
every single keynote session.
And it's tomorrow afternoon at 5 o'clock,
so you'll definitely want to see that.
Core Video.
Core Video is, one way to think about
Core Video is it takes the output of
QuickTime and maps it into the GPU.
And so it basically, new for QuickTime,
is separating the decoding logic
from the presentation logic.
So it solves the video
on a texture problem,
which we know a lot of
our internal developers,
and I know a lot of you guys as well,
have had.
We've had like four or five
different examples on the website
of how to do video on a texture.
None of them were actually optimal.
And we're just solving that in
Tiger in a great way where you get
total asynchronous behavior and data
flow between the GPU and the CPU.
And that's really what allows
us to do some of these demos
like 6DP high definition H.264.
It allows also, once you get the video
frames up in the GPU,
you can use Core Image on
them for video effects.
So bonus session on that, of course,
the Core Image effect,
the Core Image talk,
as well as new directions
for QuickTime performance.
where you're going to see a
lot of this stuff in action.
So that's Core Video.
So we have a whole stack of
technologies we call Quartz at the
core level of the operating system.
And we think it's a great substrate
for you guys to build apps on.
And I'm going to show you
Quartz Composer one more time.
I had a quick demo of it before.
I spent a little bit
more time on it here.
Quartz Composer is an application
that harnesses the power of the
Quartz layer using Core Graphics,
OpenGL, Core Video,
and all of the technologies.
Compositions can be saved in files,
kind of like-- you can
think of them as meta files.
And they can have OpenGL, info,
Core Graphics, et cetera.
And there's a simple playback
API that's a framework.
The engine's built into the OS.
So you can load a
composition and play it.
And it creates a procedural animation.
You can actually expose the variables
outside of your animation to the
key value coding system in Cocoa and
set parameters like images or
text strings into the animation.
So let me give you a demo
of that real quick here.
[Transcript missing]
nd I'm going to show you a
couple of things this time
that I didn't show last time,
like masks, slideshows, kind of neat.
Basically, it takes some of the images
from the screen saver and
puts them through a mask.
It generates a mask with OpenGL and then
does a blit using the graphics hardware.
I think this one pretty
much is straight up OpenGL.
It doesn't use any core image,
just uses blending modes in the hardware.
So that one's, that's pretty interesting.
Let me switch back to Finder
and show you Distortion FX.
Distortion FX is an interesting one.
So here's something you hadn't seen
before with the other composer demo.
It says drag and drop an input
file into the input parameters.
And so what this composition
does is it's all this wiring and
in the details of the plumbing,
but it exposes two variables,
an image and a duration.
And so it's waiting for input.
And so let's drag Copenhagen,
just an image of Copenhagen Harbor there.
And let's look at that full screen.
It's using some core image effects,
the optile and the bump
distortion to do that.
So you can see how if you
had an application and you
wanted to do that to an image,
you could just actually create
a Quartz Composer composition,
load it up, and then just key value
those couple of variables,
and you've got it going.
So to drive that home a little bit more,
let me show you...
Another one we have, which is a,
we have engrave your iPods, well,
we have engrave your G5, so.
Let's look at the input.
I'll show it to you down here, I can say,
Peter's G5.
And you can see it now.
It says Peter's G5.
You can't really see it too well.
So let's actually build an app
based out of this composition.
So I actually have a nib file.
There's a nib file in the
example directory there.
You can see.
And we have a palette,
the Quartz Composer palette,
which is one of these, I think.
There it is.
Which has a controller,
which is the green thing, and a view,
which is the Quartz Composer view.
And what's happening is I have a
patch controller that I brought
into my project down here,
which is controlling the patch,
the G5 engraving patch.
And I have a view.
And if we look at the
parameters on the view,
By bringing up the inspector,
I'll look at the bindings.
You can see that the view is
bound to the patch controller,
which is this guy here
who's controlling the patch.
Now, if I look at this text field,
its value--
The mouse is a little twitchy,
sorry about that.
The value of the text field is
bound to the patch and to a variable
in the patch called text.value,
which is that thing that was
exported in the composer.
So now, if I run this,
I have a simple application
and if I can just type in this
text field and say Peters G5,
Let's see, I can label my own G5.
So you see it's pretty easy to go
into Quartz Composer and create a
procedural definition of either an
animation or a still thing like this
and then just wire it up and drive
data into it with Cocoa Binding.
So we think that's kind of a pretty
powerful integration technology there.
So back to slides.
So we're going to have a session
on the Quartz Composer called
Discovering the Quartz Composer.
It's 9:00 AM on Friday.
But if you want to stop by the hands-on
lab and get going with this stuff,
tomorrow morning a bunch of us are going
to be in there to help you with that,
if you want to just look at the examples
and get up and running on the tool.
So anyway,
so that's our platform of all the
new stuff we're doing in Quartz.
And I just highlighted
a lot of the new stuff.
There's tons of sessions.
I think there's about 15 sessions
just on the graphics side of stuff
that you want to talk and a bunch
more on the QuickTime and audio stuff.
So have a great conference.
And we will see you at the sessions.
And back to Tim.
Thanks a lot, Peter.
OK, so we've covered audio,
we've covered graphics,
now it's time for the video stuff,
and of course that means QuickTime.
This year I'm not going to spend any time
at all talking about marketing stuff.
We've got a tremendous amount
of good news to share with you,
but tomorrow morning Frank Casanova
and his team are going to put on
a big extravaganza here talking
about what's going on with the
marketing side of QuickTime,
the business side,
how we're doing out in the marketplace.
Fantastic story.
Going to tell you an awful
lot about our 3G strategy,
which is a tremendous
success in the marketplace.
We have by far the best system for
supporting mobile media in the world.
We support all the global
standards at this point,
and we've got just a fantastic end-to-end
story and I think you'll like it.
We're going to focus today on
the technical side of QuickTime.
This is the architecture
of QuickTime circa 1995,
obviously very simplified,
but the basic point here is that--
QuickTime is a very modular,
very componentized architecture,
but the components tend to be
oriented towards supporting QuickTime,
so they're kind of inwardly focused.
We had video processing components,
we have audio processing components,
and all of that was layered
on top of QuickDraw and on
top of the sound manager.
If we spin forward to look at what
we're doing in Tiger this year,
you're going to see some
dramatic changes taking place
down in the core of QuickTime.
And we're going to be layering
QuickTime on top of Quartz,
we're going to be putting
it on top of Core Audio,
and there's going to be some
tremendous features here.
We're going to take advantage
of all these technologies,
and I think you're going to really enjoy
what starts to happen with QuickTime.
Today I'm going to talk about
four details that were four very,
very important happenings in the world
of QuickTime that I think are going to
have profound impact on your applications
and on the ways that QuickTime starts
to proliferate around the world.
So the first thing I want
to talk about is H.264.
You saw some demos of this earlier.
Let's look at what this is really about.
So you all know what MPEG is.
These are the guys who make DVDs,
digital TV.
It's actually this compression.
It's actually a collaborative
effort between MPEG and a
lesser-known organization called ITU,
the International Telecommunications
Union.
These are the guys who back in the 1860s,
the 1860s, first set up interoperability,
an interoperability organization to
ensure that people would be able to
telegraph across national boundaries.
They then applied that
kind of mindset to radio,
and more recently they do
it with telecommunications.
And they're really wonderful.
They're one of the premier
organizations for advanced
technology in the area of compression
as it applies to communications.
The goal is very simple.
Build the best codec
that anybody's ever seen.
It supports a lot of different modes.
We'll talk about that
some more in a second.
What you may not know is that
Apple's been involved in this
standard for a long time,
and we've actually got a whole
bunch of patented technology built
into the core of the standard.
And the format is built on
the QuickTime file format,
of course, so that's a great thing.
Here's a little bit of a... a timeline
chart showing you kind of how the video
compression efficiency story has evolved.
The upper line shows you
the story for MPEG-2,
and the lower lines are showing
you what's been happening with
some of the more modern codecs.
And the orange piece, obviously,
is the 264.
A couple things to notice.
We learned an awful lot about video
compression over the last 10 years.
And a lot of that was able to be
played out in the MPEG-2 standard.
So even though the standard
was established in 1994,
for the next 10 years,
we saw dramatic improvements
in the efficiencies of MPEG-2.
So you sometimes hear a story which says,
"Well, your codec isn't good enough.
You don't have the right standard."
The thing you gotta separate
out here is the politics from
the reality of the technologies.
And what we know is that with
each successive generation
of these technologies,
there are an incredible number
of tools that are built into
these little algorithms that we
all have to learn how to use.
And this shows you,
in a very graphic way, what happened with
MPEG over the last 10 years.
I mean, this is dramatic.
They went from almost 6 megabits
down to just under 2 megabits to
achieve the same level of quality.
And what we're gonna
see with MPEG-4 Part 10,
H.264, ABC,
it goes by a billion different names.
We're gonna see, again,
a continuing evolution as we
learn how to use this codec.
Let me give an example of the kinds
of stuff that we're working through.
So this is MPEG-4 Part 2.
This is the version of MPEG-4
that we ship in QuickTime 6 today.
That we've distributed literally hundreds
and hundreds of millions of copies of.
This is sort of a summary of the various
algorithms that are combined together to
create the overall compression effect.
H.264 offers this vocabulary of tools.
So you might imagine that a software
developer trying to build these kinds
of technologies is gonna take quite a
while to learn how to use them optimally.
We've been working on
this for a long time.
We think we have a fantastic
implementation already.
But it's gonna get a whole
lot better as the years go on.
So we're really, really excited about it.
What I want to show you now... Oops.
Nope.
There we go.
I'll show you a little demo
of something we've never been
able to do in QuickTime before.
And I'm gonna do it in H.264,
which you would think would
be the hardest place to do it.
We've been talking about
high-def content a lot today.
And as you can tell, Apple's very,
very interested in high def.
We have... We can support high def
at the standard for a long time.
We can do it at frame rates--30 frames,
24 frames per second.
We can do amazing things
with large frame sizes.
But there's another flavor of high
def that's often referred to as 60p.
And this is actually
60 frames per second.
I'm gonna show you a little
demo of QuickTime playing this
content... at 60 frames per second.
First thing you notice,
I pulled down the menu
and it didn't stutter.
Pretty good.
Now, so, what's interesting here,
this is, you know,
the video itself's not terribly dramatic.
You saw a different
clip of it this morning,
but it's playing at 60
full frames per second.
Now, you would think, well, this is,
yeah, this is a computational problem.
You've got a really fast computer.
Actually, it's not that heavy duty
of a compute problem.
We're not using that much of the CPU,
but what the problem has always been,
has been that, you know,
you can't get the frames to the card
fast enough to be able to keep up.
Because of the fact that we're now
layering QuickTime on top of Core Video,
we're able to do this perfectly.
So, Core Video combined with QuickTime is
not only providing us access to these
amazing image processing capabilities
that are built into the GPU,
it's also providing some
absolutely outrageous abilities
to transfer data over to the card,
which is obviously the other
thing that we're able to do.
So, that's another half of the problem.
If you can't get the stuff
to the card fast enough,
you're not going to be able
to do anything with it.
We're working with the Core Video guys as
well to come up with very highly optimal
methods for pulling the data back.
If you can't pull it back out,
then you're not really going
to be able to get it out,
firewire it to your cameras,
or wherever else you want
to go very effectively.
And so, we're working on a lot
of problems in this area,
and it's very exciting that we're
relayering this stuff the way we are.
So, that's QuickTime playing 60p content,
something that's going to be
able to do a lot of things.
we've never seen before.
Peter referred to this session earlier.
There's a whole bunch of
information available about what
we're doing in the area of 264.
In particular, the underlying format
is outrageously complex,
and we're introducing some new
capabilities in QuickTime to be able
to manipulate these formats in the
ways you're accustomed to being able
to manipulate video today in QuickTime,
even though when you learn the facts,
you would think it would be
impossible to edit this stuff ever.
And we're going to make it very,
very easy so that your applications have
no changes in the vast majority of cases,
and if you do extremely
sophisticated stuff,
you'll have to make a few changes,
and it's going to be very exciting.
Okay,
so the next thing I want to talk about
is some of the specifics about what
happens when you put QuickTime on
top of these Quartz technologies.
I showed you some data transfer
optimizations that are pretty
exciting for a bunch of people
who are focused on video.
Let me show you some other things
that we can do now that are very cool.
Now, I'm not going to,
I don't have slides with words.
I think the demo will say it all.
Here we go.
This is a little test app that we
developed in the last couple of days.
That's another very important point.
This stuff has gotten so easy
to program because we're really
working all in Cocoa now.
And it's just, it's amazing how fast
these things come together.
And you're not really making,
you're not making performance
compromises by going down the easy path.
It's incredibly important.
So here we have a video, iRobot trailer.
And the first thing you'll see-- OK,
I'll turn the volume
down just a little bit.
The first thing that you can
see is it's just like a lot of
the apps that we're making now.
Live resize.
Very smooth, moves like butter.
But there's a lot more going
on here than meets the eye.
So I'm going to zoom back
from the video a little bit,
and what you can see is I can just
grab this video and move it around.
Again, I'm not losing frames
or anything like that.
That's kind of neat.
What you can also see is that
actually what we're doing is we're
playing video onto a surface.
Okay, well that's...
That's pretty cool.
This is sort of the infamous, gee,
if I could only play to a GL surface,
then I could do all these
wild and crazy things.
But that's always been
virtually impossible.
We've made that really,
really simple now.
So the next thing we're going
to do is we'll just do a little
fade back here to normal.
And I'm going to show you,
we built some presets into the
application to allow me to talk and
make things change at the same time.
And let me show you a couple of them.
So this first one is just going to
take the video and we're going to
just slide it down into the corner.
Now,
We have all these frames flying
through Quartz Video and we want
to be able to kind of visualize
what that might look like.
So we built this groovy...
Oops, groovy little feature to
let me spit the frames out.
Now, let me show you.
This is not, like, rendered.
It's not faked up.
I mean, this is all live.
This is live.
I can do all the same kind of 3D
stuff that we were doing when it
was just on the single surface.
Let me go back to normal.
So we do an animated-- We can
do a little slow-mo thing,
'cause it's just the way
these things have to work.
So we've got another one here.
This one will take it and put
it over in the other corner.
So now the frames are
coming back out this way.
You know,
that's kind of fun to go back and forth.
We've got another little effect
we can do here where we just start
taking the frames and twirling them.
That's kind of fun.
This is one I always wanted to see.
It's sort of our matrix effect here.
We'll take the video.
I'll put it back in the
straight-ahead mode.
So now we're looking into the frames.
We can zoom back it out.
It's kind of cool.
And then we can go back.
Go back to normal.
So this is obviously a very small example
of the kinds of things that you're going
to be able to do with QuickTime layered
on top of the Quartz technology.
It's really fun.
So that's QuickTime on Quartz.
Whoops,
I'm going the wrong way in the world.
Thank you.
Okay, QuickTime and Core Audio.
So we've been talking a lot about
QuickTime on the image stack side.
Talk a little bit more
about what's happening with
QuickTime on the audio side.
So we've basically re-layered
QuickTime entirely on top of Core Audio.
It has some very...
Very obvious benefits.
We're going to be able to support all
the same high-def audio formats that
you can support in Core Audio today.
We'll support including
surround audio formats.
And when you go to some of the other
QuickTime sessions where they'll
be talking about this in detail,
you'll see some amazing demos.
This also has an incredibly important
but perhaps lesser known effect,
which is that the quality of the
synchronization across tracks
is going to be rock solid.
We're going to be down to
sample level accuracy in the
synchronization part of the system,
which is fantastically important.
And you'll be able to leverage
the DSP capabilities that
are present in audio units.
So I think I have a little
demo of that as well.
Yeah, okay,
so I showed you a very simple time scale.
I showed you a very simple scaling
demo in the AU Lab application.
I want to show you what you can
do with this applied to more
of a real-world application.
So we have a little movie here,
Harry Potter trailer.
This is what happens when
you normally go fast forward.
So you get the kind of chipmunk thing.
Okay, well, that's cute,
but not a lot of fun.
- Change the modes that
QuickTime's running in.
Let me start the movie up again.
This time, let's get it going.
Now listen to what happens.
- On page 394.
- Is that working?
You almost can't tell that it's been
sped up because you can actually
understand what's happening now.
So we've taken this one step further,
and we actually added
a little menu in here.
To be able to access the controls
a little bit more directly since
the fast forward is sort of more
constrained and I can play it along.
So now I've got the
ability to speed it up.
[Transcript missing]
Anyway, so you get the idea.
You can modify the pitch and the tempo,
and we're going to try and come
up with some clever ways to be
able to integrate this into more
of the products that we build,
but we think it's a very
interesting technology,
and I just wanted you to get a
quick glimpse of what would be
possible as we start to leverage
these inside of the whole stack.
So, the last thing I want to talk
about is something we call QtKit.
We have gotten a lot of
feedback about what it's like to
program QuickTime on Mac OS X,
and I've heard loud and clear,
"QuickTime's very hard to learn.
There's 2,400 APIs.
How am I ever supposed
to figure this out?
You use data types that I don't like.
I don't understand what they are.
I don't want to have to create them.
You're messing up my life.
Why do I have to do this?" So,
I heard it.
I've heard it.
So I'm very,
very happy to report that we're
introducing a whole new framework
to be able to work with QuickTime.
And it's going to give you
a very rich set of services,
but like a lot of the other services
that you find in the system these days,
it's going to be really,
really straightforward to use,
fantastic impedance match with Cocoa,
of course,
and it's going to be able to take
advantage of all the other advancements
we've been talking about today.
It'll be able to be combined
with all the other toolkits,
and you're going to be
able to do amazing things.
To help me illustrate some of
the very basic elements of this,
I want to ask...
Oh, yep, there we go.
Ask Tim Monroe to come up and
show you a very simple demo.
Tim's one of the designers of QtKit,
and it's very cool.
Hi, Tim.
TIM MONROE: Hi.
Thank you.
So one of the first things
people ask when they get a
new framework in Cocoa is,
what can I do for free?
Show me the zero lines of code demo.
And that's what I want
to show you here now.
So what I'm going to do is to show,
to emphasize that there
are zero lines of code.
Actually,
first I'm going to clean up here.
Okay.
I'm going to do everything
inside of Interface Builder.
So you can't write any
code in Interface Builder.
So this will prove it.
So here's a new palette for
the QuickTime movie view,
the Qt movie view,
which is the central view
aspect of the new kit.
What I'm going to do is ask
for a new Cocoa application.
So now I've just got a window here.
And I will drag the palette
item into the window.
And there you can see it already
looks a little bit like a movie.
Let me resize this to fit the window.
And then I want to set a
few attributes for this.
First, I want to set the size so that
when I resize the movie window,
the Qt Movie View will
resize automatically.
And then let's look back
at the Attributes pane.
You can see I've got sort of a
handful of things I can control here.
I can show or hide the controller bar.
I can make the movie
editable or not editable.
And let's just stick it with that.
The last thing I can do here is
attach a movie to this Qt Movie View.
And I'm just going to
grab the Harry Potter.
And now I can go ahead and run
this inside of Interface Builder.
I'll test Interface.
And I've got a QuickTime movie that
I can run with zero lines of code.
This is using the
accelerated visual context.
I've got all the goodies in Cocoa.
Let me just illustrate that briefly.
One thing you like to get with a view is
if I hold down the control key and click,
I get a contextual menu.
So we've got a nice contextual menu here
that allows me to control the movie.
Another thing I can do here,
totally with zero lines of code,
is make some selections.
I can come up here and cut,
perhaps go over here and paste that.
That was such a good section,
I'll paste it over here.
Maybe I'll come in here and cut this out.
And because we're built on top of Cocoa,
I can undo all of this
up to the very top.
I can undo the cut,
undo the second paste,
undo the first paste,
undo the original cut,
and now I'm back to where I can't undo
anymore because I'm back to the movie.
Let me show you one more thing.
I'll start it playing.
And again, Tim sort of talked a
little bit about this,
but I can resize this and you'll
notice that I'm getting full frame
playback while I'm resizing it.
So that's your basic live resizing
handled automatically for you
by our new QtKit framework.
And that's what I've got to show.
Thank you.
So that's really exciting.
You know, this stuff is very powerful.
We're actually building
QuickTime Player on top of QtKit now.
So the QuickTime Player that's
in your seeds,
in the developer seed that
we've handed out today,
is actually built on top of QtKit.
It's a very powerful toolkit.
There's a session that will cover
this in great detail coming up on
Thursday and you should check it out.
It's very cool.
So here are four really big
developments that we're making,
advancements we're making in QuickTime.
This is probably the most profound set
of changes we've made to QuickTime since
it was introduced back in 1991.
It's very, very exciting.
We've got a whole new architecture.
We're working very closely across
all the different layers within
the team to be able to build
highly optimized implementations.
We're working very closely across
all the different layers within
the team to be able to build
highly optimized implementations.
And so that's QuickTime.
So we're just about at the end here.
I wanted to tell you one reminder.
There is this Graphics and Media Lab.
It's a hands-on lab
running all week long.
I'm not sure if you know where it is,
but it's downstairs in the back.
And there's a lot of engineers
hanging out down there waiting to
help you with your applications,
help you tune them,
help you figure out how to do things,
tell you about the new stuff.
And I hope you have a chance
to go down and see this.
I told you at the beginning of the talk,
we wanted to focus on some very valuable
technologies that would help you improve
the quality of your user interface,
would help you unlock
some amazing performance,
and would help you build
applications and tools that were
going to stand the test of time.
And I hope you can see
that with this stack,
QuickTime, Quartz, OpenGL,
on top of the great Apple hardware,
we think we've got a great
platform for innovation here.
And I just want to say thanks.
I hope you have a great time with it.
Thank you.